Document the release process (#985)
tweag/nickel: RELEASING.md

# Release process for Nickel

You're ready to release a new version of Nickel - congrats!

This document explains how to do so step by step while keeping the various
crates and dependent repositories (such as the website) in a consistent state.

## Steps to make a release

### Prepare

1. Branch out from `master` to a dedicated branch `X.Y.Z-release`:
   `git checkout -b X.Y.Z-release`
2. Bump the version number of all the crates of the workspace to `X.Y.Z`:
   - Bump the `version` attribute to `X.Y.Z` in files `./Cargo.toml`,
     `./utilities/Cargo.toml`, `lsp/nls/Cargo.toml` and
     `./nickel-wasm-repl/Cargo.toml`.
   - Bump the version of the interdependencies of the above crates. For example,
     `nickel-lang` has the following line in `./Cargo.toml` under
     `[dev-dependencies]`:

     ```toml
     nickel-lang-utilities = {path = "utilities", version = "0.3.0"}
     ```

     You have to bump the `version` number to `X.Y.Z` of such dependencies on
     `nickel-lang`, `nickel-lang-utilities`, or any other crate of the
     workspace as well.

   Commit and push your changes.

> 3. Make sure than everything builds: run `nix flake check` and the root of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Make sure that everything builds: run `nix flake check` at the root of the
```

   $git push --force-with-lease
   ```

### Release on crates.io

1. Remove references to `nickel-lang-utilities` from the `[dev-dependencies]`
   sections of the crates to be published: `./Cargo.toml` for `nickel-lang`
   and `./lsp/nls/Cargo.toml` for `nickel-lang-lsp` (work-around for
   [cargo:#4242](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/4242).

   **Commit those changes temporarily to please cargo, but they will be
   dropped later. Do not push**.
2. Check that `cargo publish --dry-run` succeeds. You may have to create an
   account on `crates.io` and get a key for `nickel-lang` and
   `nickel-lang-lsp`: please refer to cargo documentation and contact the
   Nickel maintainers.
3. Release on crates.io: `cargo publish`
4. Ditch the potential changes made to the cargo manifests at step 1. by
   dropping the corresponding commit.

### Release on GitHub

1. Build the docker image and copy the output somewhere:

   ```console
   $nix build .#dockerImage
   $cp ./result nickel-X.Y.Z-docker-image.tar.gz
   ```

2. Do the [release on
   GitHub](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository),

>    and include the docker image built in 1. Please look at previous releases to
>    for the naming convention of git tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   and include the docker image built in 1. Please look at previous releases
   for the naming convention of git tags.
```
